docs: replace dataset discovery page with NeuroBlueprint data input guide (#90)
neuroinformatics-unit/photon-mosaic: docs/source/user_guide/data_input.md

The project is validated on every run via [`datashuttle.validate_project_from_path`](https://datashuttle.neuroinformatics.dev/) and should give you a clear error if anything went wrong.

## Converting an existing dataset

If your raw data does not yet follow the NeuroBlueprint specification, we recommend you organise it first with [datashuttle](https://datashuttle.neuroinformatics.dev/), then point `photon-mosaic` at the resulting project folder.

## Filtering which files are processed

Inside `rawdata/`, three keys under `dataset_discovery` in your `config.yaml` control which TIFFs feed into the workflow:

```yaml
dataset_discovery:
  # Glob patterns for the TIFF files to include, applied under
  # rawdata/sub-*/ses-*/funcimg/. Most projects need only "*.tif".
  tiff_patterns: ["*.tif"]

  # Regex patterns matched against subject folder names. Any subject
  # whose folder fully matches one of these patterns is skipped.
  exclude_datasets:
    - "sub-test.*"
    - "sub-IAA.*"

  # Regex patterns matched against session folder names. Any session
  # whose folder fully matches one of these patterns is skipped.
  exclude_sessions:
    - "ses-.*protocol-screening.*"
```

Notes:

> - `tiff_patterns` is a list of *glob* patterns. A glob is a filename pattern where `*` matches any sequence of characters, so `*.tif` matches every file ending in `.tif`, and `recording_*.tif` matches only files starting with `recording_`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `tiff_patterns` is a list of *glob* patterns. A glob is a filename pattern where `*` matches any sequence of characters, so `*.tif` matches every file ending in `.tif`, and `recording_*.tif` matches only files starting with `recording_` (and ending in `*.tif`).
```
To be super explicit and precise.

(user_guide/data_input)=
# Data Input

`photon-mosaic` expects raw data to follow the [NeuroBlueprint](https://neuroblueprint.neuroinformatics.dev/) specification. The pipeline does **not** rename or re-index your data: subject and session identifiers are read directly from the directory tree.

## Required layout

> Point `project_path` at a directory that contains a `rawdata/` folder organised like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`photon-mosaic` expects raw data to follow the [NeuroBlueprint](https://neuroblueprint.neuroinformatics.dev/) specification. This means your `project_path` will contain a `rawdata/` folder organised like this. `photon-mosaic` will only look at `funcimg` subfolders in your project.
```
(Removed a sentence that IMO wasn't adding much? And added one I think is adding something?)

Do we also need to repeat the bash command with `--project-path` somewhere here, so users don't have to click "back" to the main page?

Author: Just noticed it is actually `--project_path` and not `--project-path`... which is counter intuitive. Might want to update everything!

Author: Also we repeat partially the concepts with the configuration page. We might want to keep all info in the data input section and in the configuration page point at this file.

Reviewer: I actually think `--project_path` is nicer somehow.

I think the amount of repetition is OK, because on the configuration.md side, we
* only mention NBP at a high level
* link to the data input page for the details.

```
project_path/
└── rawdata/
    ├── sub-001_id-M001/
    │   ├── ses-001_date-20250101/
    │   │   └── funcimg/
    │   │       ├── recording_00001.tif
    │   │       └── ...
    │   └── ses-002_date-20250102/
    │       └── funcimg/
    │           └── ...
    └── sub-002_id-M002/
        └── ses-001_date-20250105/
            └── funcimg/
                └── ...
```

> Outputs are written next to `rawdata/` under `derivatives/`, mirroring the `sub-*/ses-*/funcimg/` structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Outputs are written by `photon-mosaic` next to `rawdata/` under `derivatives/`, mirroring the `sub-*/ses-*/funcimg/` structure.
```
I think?

> The project is validated on every run via [`datashuttle.validate_project_from_path`](https://datashuttle.neuroinformatics.dev/) in strict mode. If the layout deviates from NeuroBlueprint, the run aborts with a clear error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project is validated on every run via [`datashuttle.validate_project_from_path`](https://datashuttle.neuroinformatics.dev/) and should give you a clear error if anything went wrong.
```
Feels more user-focused to me?

## Converting an existing dataset

> If your raw data is not yet in NeuroBlueprint format, the recommended path is to organise it once with [datashuttle](https://datashuttle.neuroinformatics.dev/), then point `photon-mosaic` at the resulting project. Naming and session enumeration belong upstream of the pipeline, not inside it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your raw data does not yet follow the NeuroBlueprint specification, we recommend you organise it first with [datashuttle](https://datashuttle.neuroinformatics.dev/), then point `photon-mosaic` at the resulting project folder.
```
"Naming and session enumeration belong upstream of the pipeline, not inside it." didn't add anything uesful for me?

This makes sure we are consistent in calling it NBP specification, rather than switching between specification and format.

I wonder whether this should be closer to the top, as this will be the first thing new users will want to know.

Author: Regarding the ordering of the concepts introduced in this page, we could have a structure like:
- photon-mosaic follows neuroblueprint
- neuroblueprint looks like this
- if your project does not follow neuroblueprint you can do xyz
- you can validate your structure via datashuttle
and then filtering etc...
What do you think?

Reviewer: I think the current structure is fine. The index page is high-level. We link out to NBP where we mention it, we validate NBP in our code (which presumably will give sensible errors), and we link config and data input sections sensibly.

## Filtering which files are processed

Inside `rawdata/`, three keys under `dataset_discovery` in your `config.yaml` control which TIFFs feed into the workflow:

```yaml
dataset_discovery:
  # Glob patterns for the TIFF files to include, applied under
  # rawdata/sub-*/ses-*/funcimg/. Most projects need only "*.tif".
  tiff_patterns: ["*.tif"]

  # Regex patterns matched against subject folder names. Any subject
  # whose folder fully matches one of these patterns is skipped.
  exclude_datasets:
    - "sub-test.*"
    - "sub-IAA.*"

  # Regex patterns matched against session folder names. Any session
  # whose folder fully matches one of these patterns is skipped.
  exclude_sessions:

>     - ".*protocol-screening.*"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - "ses-.*protocol-screening.*"
```
I think?

```

Notes:

> - `tiff_patterns` is a list of globs; multiple patterns are unioned. The pipeline does not infer session numbering from the filename — sessions come from `ses-*` folder names.

Reviewer: Is `globs` and `unioned` this too technical for users? I barely know what globs are! 😆

Author: I've expanded the explanation, it should be more clear now.

Reviewer: Cool, I think this is good for the docs part now, have opened #96 to consider independently whether this could be improved on the UX side.
